24 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
Optimal management of breast cancers hinges upon standardized histopathology evaluation and 
reporting30 .
All specimens should be transported to the pathology lab immediately. In case a delay is expected surgeons 
should slice specimen’s posterior aspect upwards.
All lumpectomies should be treated as potentially harboring cancer and should be oriented for margin 
evaluation. A six surface margin (anterior, posterior, inferior, superior, medial and lateral) is sufficient for 
routine evaluation though more extensive sampling may result in greater margin positivity. Close margins 
are to be evaluated radially whereas shave margins should be evaluated for further margins.
All specimens should be fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin with pH7.2 to 7.4. Sections for ER/
PR/Her2neu estimation should be fixed for no less than 6 hours and no more than 72 hours before 
processing. ASCO-CAP guidelines suggest recording the time specimen is out of patients body and 
time specimen is fixed in formalin for validating specimen fixation. ASCO-CAP guideline state “It is the 
responsibility of the surgeon and operating room staff or the 
radiologist and his/her staff obtaining the 
specimen to document the collection time, and it is the responsibility of the pathologist and laboratory 
staff to document the fixation start time”.
For lymph nodes, record t he number, size of largest node and number of grossly metastatic nodes. 
One section from grossly metastatic nodes is enough. For lymph nodes>5mm in maximum size slice 
at approximately 3mm or less perpendicular to the long axis. Lymph nodes <5mm should ideally be 
bisected and blocked; alternatively, lymph nodes <5mm can be blocked in their entirety. Nodes should be 
counted even on microscopy to avoid duplication of nodes during submission.
For sentinel node, slice at 2mm interval and submit entirely. If the initial H&E stained section is negative, 
four levels are cut. Three of these sections are stained by H&E and one randomly chosen section is 
stained with an epithelial IHCstain.
Sections to be taken
Lumpectomy
A:  Four sections from tumor all with adjacent normal breast;
B to G: Six surface margins;
H:  Remaining Axillary /apical nodes
Mastectomy
Specimens are evaluated similarly but base is the only relevant margin.
Nipple areola and overlying skin 
should be evaluated whenever included in specimen.
CHAPTER
7 HISTOPATHOLOGICAL  EVALUATION  AND REPORTING 
25 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
All mammographically detected lesions should be grossed under mammographic guidance. Make sure 
to block the entire lesion so as that the size of lesions can be reconstructed microscopically. Also sample 
margins of lesions radiologically.
Essentials in a Histopathology report:
Tumor size (all 3 dimensions) •
Tumor type •
Tumor grade (Modified Richardson Bloom Score) •
Presence of extensive intraductal carcinoma (EIC)* •
Lymphovascular emboli •
Margin status (negative /close /focal positive /gross positive) in wide excision** •
No.of metastatic nodes and total axillary lymph node dissected •
Receptor status: ER and PR (by IHC or EIA) and HER2neu by IHC. ER and PR should be scored as  •
described later.**
HER2neu of 2+ on IHC is considered equivocal and this can be resolved by FISH test for gene  •
amplification, which is considered amplified or positive if score >2.2.
*EIC: DCIS in >25% of any low power field within or outside the tumor. It is a strong predictor of local 
recurrence after BCT, especially if margins are positive.
**Gross +ve cut margin: Extensive involvement of a cut margin OR >3 foci of invasive or in-situ carcinoma 
in any inked margin. It requires revision excision or mastectomy.
**Focal positive cut margin: 3 or less foci of invasive or in-situ carcinoma in any inked margin. It requires 
revision surgery especially if EIC is present
Modified Richardson Bloom grading system (Nottingham’s modification)
Tubule Nuclear grade Mitosis/10hpf*
Score1 >75% Small uniform nuclei, no pleomorphism 0-6
Score2 10-75% Moderate sized nuclei with pleomorphism 7-12
Score3 <10% Marked pleomorphism >12
Final score 3-5=Grade I, Final Score 6-7=Grade II, Final Score 8-9=Grade III
*Could vary with microscope.
Grade all carcinomas, including post NACT, special types and core biopsies. •
ER/PR estimation should be routinely performed. ERPR expression in >1% of cells is reported  •
as positive for hormone receptors. For ER/PR estimation it is crucial to fix tissues in 10% neutral 
buffered formalin and employ pressure cooking methods for antigen retrieval. When reporting on 
outside referral material, if fixation procedure is not documented, poor quality of fixation, if evident, 
should be commented. Though ASCO-CAP guidelines suggest that such samples should be rejected, 
it is not feasible in many Indian practice settings. Including normal breast tissue along with tumor 
section helps to asses internal control for hormone receptor and validate a given test result
31,32.
26 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
Her2neu IHC testing should ideally be done by the FDA approved Hercep test OR  Ventana Her2neu  •
assay. However these FDA approved assays are not commonly used in India due to their cost. Hence 
before using any non validated antibody in routine practice, the laboratory should validate it either 
with FISH or the FDA approved IHC assays. Any Her2neu IHC showing membranous staining 
of normal breast epithelium should be reevaluated. Since patients with IHC score 3 may receive 
Trastuzumab without FISH confirmation, strict guidelines 
for interpretation and reporting should be 
followed. Only a complete and crisp membrane staining without any cytoplasmic staining in >30% 
of cells should be interpreted as score 3 or positive. Score 2 staining results in complete membrane 
staining but in 
<30% of cells and considered equivocal. All other staining is negative (score1/0). For 
FISH, count non overlapping cells and select block for invasive tumor. Reject FISH if signals are non-
uniform, background obscures interpretation, autofluorescence
33.
Ki67 correlates with tumour grade and can provide useful additional prognostic information in low  •
grade tumours. Validated Ki67/MIB1 testing in node negative, small, low grade tumours can help 
decide the need for chemotherapy in such cases.