14 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
B
reast cancer staging is done after careful clinical evaluation and appropriate investigations as 
described in the next chapter. The staging system has evolved over the decades from simple 
classification of breast cancer as operable, inoperable to metastatic cancer to more detailed UICC 
and AJCC TNM system. The two commonly used staging system are outlined here.
PRAGMATIC CLINICAL STAGING SYSTEM
A) Operable Breast Cancer (OBC): T1-2, N0-1,M0
T1-2: Primary Tumor size up to 5 cm without skin or chest wall involvement 
N0-1: Clinically uninvolved axilla or mobile axillary nodes
M0: No metastatic disease on relevant investigative work up
B) Large Operable Breast Cancer (LOBC): T3, N0-1,M0
T3: Primary tumour size >5 cm without skin or chest wall involvement
N0-1: Clinically uninvolved axilla or mobile axillary nodes
M0: No metastatic disease on relevant investigative work up
C)
Locally Advanced Breast Cancer (LABC): T4 or N2-3,M0
T4: Primary Tumor of any size but involves skin or chest wall 
N2-3: Matted or fixed axillary nodes or supraclavicular or internal mammary nodes 
M0: No metastatic disease on relevant investigative work up
D)
Metastatic Breast Cancer (MBC): Any T or N stage with distant metastasis (M1)
TNM STAGING SYSTEM (Clinical) 
Primary tumour
Tx Primary tumour cannot be assessed
Tis In Situ carcinoma
T1 Primary Tumor size up to 2 cm without skin or chest wall involvement 
T2 Primary Tumor size up to >2 cm up to 5 cm without skin or chest wall involvement
T3 Primary tumour size >5 cm without skin or chest wall involvement
T4 Primary tumour involves skin, chest wall, satellite nodules or inflammatory breast cancer
T4a Involves chest wall
T4b Involves skin
T4c Involves skin and chest wall 
T4d Inflammatory breast cancer
Lymph nodes
Nx Nodes cannot be assessed
No Clinically uninvolved axilla 
N1 Mobile ipsilateral level I or II axillary nodes
CHAPTER
3 STAGING AND PROGNOSTIC CRITERIA
15 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
N2a Matted or fixed ipsilateral axillary nodes
N2b Ipsilateral Internal Mammary Nodes (IMN) without axillary nodes
N3a Ipsilateral Infraclavicular lymph nodes
N3b Ipsilateral IMN + axillary nodes 
N3c Ipsilateral Supraclavicular nodes
Metastasis
M0 No metastatic disease on relevant investigative work up
M1 Metastatic disease 
TNM STAGING SYSTEM (Pathological) 
Primary tumour
pTx Primary tumour cannot be assessed
pTis In Situ carcinoma
pT1 Primary Tumor size up to 2 cm without skin or chest wall involvement 
pT2 Primary Tumor size up to >2 cm up to 5 cm without skin or chest wall involvement
pT3 Primary tumour size >5 cm without skin or chest wall involvement
pT4 Primary tumour involves skin, chest wall, satellite nodules or inflammatory breast cancer
pT4a Involves chest wall
pT4b Involves skin
pT4c Involves skin and chest wall 
pT4d Inflammatory breast cancer
pNx Nodes cannot be assessed
Lymph nodes
pNo No regional lymph node metastasis identified histologically
pN1mi Micro-metastasis (> 0.2 mm but < 2.0 mm)
pN1a 1-3 axillary nodes
pN1b Ipsilateral Internal Mammary Nodes (IMN) on sentinel node biopsy without axillary nodes
pN1c N1a + N1b
pN2a 4-9 axillary nodes
pN2b Clinically apparent IMN without axillary node metastasis
pN3a ≥ 10 axillary LNs  OR  Infraclavicular  LNs involved.
pN3b Clinically apparent IMNs + positive axillary nodes OR >3 axillary nodes + IMN only on SLN biopsy
pN3c Ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes
Metastasis
M0 No metastatic disease on relevant investigative work up
M1 Metastatic disease 
16 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
B
reast cancer is prone to systemic spread, the probability of which increases with tumour size, local 
infiltration and lymph node metastasis. Some investigations are essential for clinical management, 
especially if the desirable investigations are not feasible due to various reasons and indicated 
against each investigation for different stages of the disease.
OBC LOBC/LABC MBC Purpose/ Comments
RoutineTests
(CBC, Biochemistry)
YES YES YES To assess fitness for anesthesia & chemotherapy
Breast Imaging
(see flow chart)
YES YES *In selected 
cases where 
it is clinically 
indicated
B/LMammography: If the breast lump is 
suspected to be malignant, especially if BCT is 
being considered.
USG: If cystic/ benign lesion is suspected, 
especially in young women
MRI: In expert centres breast MRI is useful 
in screening or characterizing breast lump if 
mammography is sub-optimal due to dense 
breast (as in some young women) or prior breast 
reconstruction. Specially useful for screening 
young women at high risk of developing breast 
cancer due to family history or BRCA mutation
Cytological/ 
Histopathological
Confirmation of
diagnosis
YES YES YES
Core biopsy: Preferred method in all cases and 
mandatory if Neo- adjuvant systemic therapy is 
planned for histological grading and receptor 
status. To mark the site of the primary tumor the 
core biopsy should be centered over the tumor.
FNAC: is acceptable in cases with clinical and 
mammographically evident cancer planned for 
upfront surgery.
Incision or Excision Biopsy: When there is high 
clinical suspicion and repeated FNAC/core biopsy 
are negative
ER/ PR YES YES YES IHC (>1% tumour cells staining for ER considered 
ER+ve)16.
HER2 #YES #YES #YES #More relevant in cases for whom Traztuzamab 
is feasible Standardized IHC for HER2; If IHC is 
equivocal (2+) then FISH
ChestX Ray YES YES YES To assess fitness for anesthesia and for staging in 
LOBC / LABC
17BoneScan *No ^YES ^YES *If raised Alkaline Phosphatase or bone 
symptoms/sign
^If Bone scan not feasible due to various logistical 
or healthcare provision issues, perform Skeletal 
survey, especially if symptomatic.
CHAPTER
4 DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION AND STAGING WORK UP
17 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
17USGAbdomen *No ^YES ^YES *If abnormal LFT or suspicious symptoms / signs.
^Not required if CT Thorax & Abdomen is being 
performed
17CTThorax
/Abdomen
*No ^YES ^YES *If abnormal LFT or suspicious symptoms / signs.
^If CT Scan is not feasible due to various logistical 
or healthcare provision issues, Chest X Ray and 
USG Abdomen for staging
FDG PET/CT Scan No #In selected cases #In selected 
cases
#Specially useful if standard imaging findings are 
equivocal.
Tumour markers
(CA-15.3 etc)
No No No Clinical Utility in making diagnosis and disease 
monitoring not yet established
Multi-gene
Signature 
Mammaprint and 
Oncotype Dx
*No Notapplicable Not 
applicable
Their clinical utility and added value in routine 
practice is as yet unknown and there is very little 
data in the Indian patients. Recently an IHC4 test 
(ER,PR, HER2 and Ki-67) seems to provide useful 
information and is advocated by NICE in research 
settings
Partly adapted from NCCN/ ESMO/ NICE practice guidelines)4-9
4.1 EVALUATION OF A BREAST LUMP
All women with a breast lump should undergo a TRIPLE TEST comprising of
1. Clinical Examination by experienced clinician, preferably a breast surgeon.
2. Breast Imaging#: Bilateral Mammogram and or Ultrasound or MRI as appropriate.
3. Histopathology*: FNAC / Core biopsy (Ideal). Excision Biopsy/Incision biopsy if indicated.
Based on clinical examination and appropriate breast imaging the lump can be classified as cystic or solid. 
Based on the index of suspicion for malignancy (age, clinical finding, family history or previous breast 
biopsy findings) solid lesions can be further characterized as likely benign or suspicious for cancer. This 
will be the basis of their further evaluation as described below: 
A) CYSTIC18,19: Breast Ultrasound followed by clinically guided or USG guided cyst aspiration. Women 
with small multiple cysts or if there is clear fluid on aspiration can be observed. Cytology / histopathology 
evaluation* is advised for cysts which are complex or hemorrhagic, refill rapidly or have a residual 
lump.
B) SOLID BENIGN: Should be evaluated with breast imaging# and excision biopsy if solid  
C) SUSPICIOUS SOLID: Should be evaluated with breast imaging# and if on imaging the lump is still 
suspicious it should be evaluated with cytology / histopathology* 
BENIGN: Excision biopsy
MALIGNANT: Follow relevant algorithm
# IMAGING MODALITY FOR BREAST LESIONS
1. If clinically it is a cyst: evaluate by USG.
2. If less than 30yrs and cli nically benign: evaluate by USG.
3. If above 30 yrs or below 30 yrs with clinical suspicion: evaluate by Mammography+/-USG.
18 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
4. While there is no defined role of routine breast MRI prior to Breast Conserving surgery20,  in centres 
with experience in Breast MRI, it may be used in women with
a. Premenopausal women with dense breasts & equivocal mammogram if BCT is planned.
b. Screening high risk women due to family history or BRCA mutation8.
c. Axillary node metastasis without clinical/mammographic evidence of breast primary.
d. Optimal mammographic evaluation is not possible due to breast reconstruction or implants.
*HISTOPATHOLOGY CONFIRMATION:
1.  Core biopsy is preferred for all cases, especially if Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is planned (for grading 
and receptor status) and for guided biopsy of non-palpable lesion. Biopsy to be centered over the 
tumor to mark it location.
2.  In our country with infrastructure issues, FNAC is acceptable provided multiple passes are done & 
quality smears are prepared. On site evaluation with rapid Diff Quick Stain ensures reducing number 
of non diagnostic FNAC’s.
3.   For papillary tumors and intraductal carcinoma, excision biopsy for definite diagnosis.
4. Incision/Excision Biopsy: If high clinical suspicion and repeated FNAC or core biopsies are negative.
5. Frozen section is useful in expert centres if all above fail. Not recommended for papillary  lesions & 
complex sclerosing lesions. 
4.2 EVALUATION FOR NIPPLE DISCHARGE
Based on detailed history and clinical examination, in women without any associated breast lump or 
abnormal mammogram, further evaluation is based on the colour of the nipple discharge as described 
below: 
A) Galactorrhoea/White: 
If the woman is not lactating or pregnant then serum prolactin and thyroid profile should be done and 
reassessed
B) Grumous/Greenish: 
Consider a course of antibiotics if the nipple discharge is not blood stained and negative for RBC, especially 
if it is associated with inflammation. Should be reassessed. 
C) Serous/Yellow/Blood-stained: 
Perform breast imaging with mammography and or USG
1. Single duct involved: For spontaneous, profuse, blood stained discharge or presence of RBC  on 
cytology, consider excision of the duct (Microdochectomy)  
2. Multiple ducts involved: For profuse multiple duct involvement especially in postmenopausal women, 
consider Hadfield’s surgery.