29 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
P
ostoperative RT using Linac or telecobalt to the breast/ chest wall with or without lymphatic areas 
is indicated in most cases, except after mastectomy for a DCIS or early node negative cancer. 
Several large RCTs have shown that post mastectomy radiotherapy in women with T3-4, N+ 
cancers, improve loco-regional control as well as survival 41,42  Large randomized trials have also shown 
that radiotherapy after conservative surgery is integral in achieving loco-regional control comparable to 
mastectomy and with improved body image 43,44 . The aim is to use an appropriate technique for safely 
giving adequate doses of radiation, equivalent to 50Gy/25#/5weeks, to control subclinical disease in 
tissues at risk (chest wall/ breast+/-SCF).
A. Indications for postoperative Radiotherapy
Post Mastectomy RT (PMRT) to chest wall +/- nodal area
>3 axillary nodes positive  •
Any number of nodes positive after NACT •
Clinically or Pathologically T3 or T4 Tumour  •
Positive resection margins •
Known residual disease in axilla •
Initial involvement of SCF/IMC •
For 1-3 nodes +ve, PMRT is being increasingly considered following recent EBCTCG metaanalysis  •
(McGale et al. Lancet. 2014), which showed improvement in breast cancer specific mortality. With 
routine use of more effective chemotherapy, the absolute benefit of PMRT in patients with 1-3 node 
+ve but smaller tumours with favourable features is likely to be less and may be individualized based 
on age and comorbidity.
After Breast Conservative Surgery: All cases of BCT require postoperative RT. However, RT may be 
avoided in selected elderly women with small,  node –ve, low grade, ER/PR+ve  tumours with low risk of 
recurrence as seen in the recent PRIME trial (Kunkler et al Lancet Oncology, 2015)
IMC RT: RT to IMC fell into disuse after its associated excess cardiac mortality became evident.  Two 
recent RCTs - EORTC (Poortman et al, NEJM 2015) and MA-20 (Whelan et al, NEJM 2015) evaluating 
the role of RT to SCF plus IMC in patients with medial or central quadrant tumours or those with axillary 
node +ve, showed a modest improvement in DFS but no difference in overall survival. Moreover, the 
contribution of IMC RT in the very modest benefit with SCF plus IMC RT is likely to be even smaller. 
In addition there are technical challenges in planning and delivering cardiac safe IMC RT. Hence most 
centres around the world continue to offer IMC RT only for cases with radiological or pathological 
evidence of IMC node involvement.
CHAPTER
9 RADIOTHERAPY 
30 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
Axilla: It is a common practice in many Indian centres to treat axilla for all node +ve cases, possibly due 
to sub-optimal axillary surgery or histopathological evaluation in practice settings. As post-op axillary 
RT can increase arm & shoulder morbidity, it is advocated for residual axillary disease or node +ve after  
inadequate axillary surgery and revision surgery is not being considered for various reasons. Recently the 
EORTC-AMAROS trial (Donker et al, Lancet Oncol. 2014) shows that in T1-2 clinically node negative 
with sentinel node biopsy +ve, axillary RT results in excellent disease control comparable to completion 
axillary dissection but with different morbidity pattern.
B. Treatment Area and Technique for Radiotherapy
1. Chest wall: Bitangential portals, isocentric or with breast cone. Bolus if skin was involved or at high 
risk of recurrence. For left sided tumours, minimize cardiac dose with appropriate beam angulation and 
cardiac shielding if required.
2. Whole Breast: Bitangential portals; Isocentric, with appropriate wedges. 3DCRT or IMRT if large 
breasts to reduce acute/late toxicity in areas of dose inhomogeneity. LINAC preferable but Telecobalt can 
be used if  Interfiled separation is <18cm & breast is not large. Avoid cardiac dose with beam placement 
or cardiac shielding.
3. SCF (in axillary N+ cases or initial SCF involvement): Direct anterior portals, avoiding overlap with 
tangents to prevent matchline fibrosis and rare occurrence of  brachial plexopathy.
4. Axilla: When indicated, axilla can be irradiated with an anterior extended SCF field  with posterior 
axillary boost. 
5. IMC (in known IMC involvement): CT planned partially wide tangents or mixed electron/photon ports 
on LINAC.
6. Tumor Bed boost (In all cases of BCT except for DCIS and in postmenopausal women with small 
tumors with favorable histology and-ve margins): Enface electrons, 3D CRT or in selected cases, HDR 
brachytherapy in expert centres.
C. Radiotherapy dose and fractionation
50Gy in 25 daily fractions over 5 weeks or its equivalent hypofractionated regime of 40Gy/15 fractions 
over 3 weeks or 42.5Gy/16# over 3 weeks45,46. Hypofractionated regimen is equivalent to the conventional 
regimen in terms of disease control and survival. These hypofractionated regimens results in significantly 
lower incidence of acute and late breast toxicity and without excess cardiac morbidity at 15 year. The 3 
week hypofractionated regime has become the standard of care in the UK, Canada and many large volume 
Indian centres for BCT and post mastectomy RT. For hypofractionated regimes, appropriate planning 
should be done to minimize dose inhomogeneity and cardiac dose.
 Tumor Bed Boost after whole breast 
RT for BCT is given with appropriate energy electrons or 3DCRT photons to a dose of 10–16Gy with 
2-2.5 Gy per fraction. For HDR boost a twice daily regimen of 4.5 - 5 Gy x 2  or 3.4Gy x 3 fractions.
D. Accelerated partial breast radiation (APBI)
This short and convenient course of RT has been tested in several large RCTs which are yet to report 
long-term results. Hence it should be considered an investigational approach. Currently, centres with 
experience are offering APBI to carefully select postmenopausal women with node negative, small tumors 
with clear margins and no adverse pathological features
47. A recent European RCT compared multicatheter 
interstitial APBI with whole breast RT + boost in 1184 women >40 years of age with up to 3 cm tumour, 
pNo or pNmi. It shows equivalent disease control and survival at a median follow up of 6.6 years (Strnad 
et al, Lancet, 2015) and this was evident in all age groups above 40 years and in all tumor types. 
E. Palliative Radiotherapy is described in the chapter of metastatic disease.