19 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
Management of breast cancer depends on several patient related factors, disease stage and predictive and 
prognostic factors as outlined below
Age1. 
Menopausal status2. 
Family history of cancer3. 
Comorbidities especially pre-existing cardiac conditions and long standing poorly controlled 4. 
hypertension, diabetes or obesity
Performance status and adequate renal and liver function5. 
Tumor size and infiltration of skin or chest wall6. 
Involvement of nipple with Paget’s disease or nipple discharge7. 
Radiological characteristics of the primary tumour – especially the nature and extent of micro-8. 
calcification
Site and extent of nodal metastasis9. 
Distant metastasis if any, its site (bone only or visceral) and extent 10. 
Histological features like grade, lymphatic invasion, resection margins and EIC11. 
Estrogen or Progesterone receptor status of primary or recurrent tumour or metastatic sites12. 
HER-2 expression in primary or recurrent tumor or metastatic sites13. 
Proliferative markers and gene signature in some cases14. 
Psycho-social and body image issues15. 
Patients wishes 16. 
Patients likely compliance with full treatment and follow up17. 
Access to health care, family and social support and affordability18. 
5.1 Management Algorithm for DCIS and DCIS with Micro-invasion
Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) is being increasingly diagnosed in the west due to widespread use of 
screening mammography. The natural history of screen detected DCIS is variable and many of these will 
not progress and may have remained clinically silent during the women’s lifetime.
Imaging for DCIS is similar to breast cancer and takes in to account the patient’s age, breast density and 
whether breast conservation is planned or not.
Core Biopsy is necessary for histopathological confirmation. For impalpable lesions it should be image 
guided biopsy and performed in centres with experience.
CHAPTER
5 MANAGEMENT OF BREAST CANCER
20 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
Surgery followed by tamoxifen is the mainstay of treatment. Post-operative RT is required after BCT in 
women at higher risk of recurrence as described below. 
Lumpectomy21,22 with Axillary Sampling or Sentinel Node Biopsy23 is considered for DCIS without diffuse 
micro-calcification or multicentric disease.
Simple mastectomy21 with or without reconstruction is performed for large or multicentric DCIS or when 
there is diffuse micro-calcification. 
Adjuvant treatment with Tamoxifen (for ER/PR +ve tumors) or Radiotherapy after lumpectomy reduces 
the risk of local recurrence of DCIS and invasive cancer24-26. Tamoxifen also reduces risk of contralateral 
DCIS and cancer. 
Use of adjuvant Tamoxifen and Radiotherapy (after lumpectomy) is guided by the University of Southern California 
/ Van Nuys Prognostic index (USC/VNPI). This stratifies a patient into high (10-12), intermediate (7-9) or 
low risk (4-6) based on the criteria which individually scores as 1, 2 or 3 as described below:
Age (>60, 40-60, <40) •
Tumor grade & comedo necrosis (low grade, high grade without comedo necrosis, high grade with  •
comedo necrosis)
Tumor size ( • <1.5cm, 1.6-4cm, >4.1 cm)
Margin from resection ( • >10mm, 1-9mm, <1mm)
Palpable DCIS with or without micro-invasion is the most common presentation of DCIS in India. In such 
scenario, role of adjuvant chemotherapy should be carefully considered especially in HER2/neu +ve and 
ER/PR –ve DCIS or micro-invasive tumors
27.
5.2 Management Schema in Operable Breast Cancer (T1-2, N0-1, M0)
Clinical Diagnosis of Operable Breast Cancer
Wishes for & *Eligible for BCT Want BCT but presently NOT suitable
Neo-Adjuvant Chemotherapy
BCT followed by
Adjuvant therapy
MRM Followed by
Adjuvant Therapy
(>4 cm tumour in small breast)
Reassess after 4-6 cycles for BCT
Multicentric tumour or
diffuse micro-calcification
Not wanting OR Not eligible
Histopathological confirmation and Breast Imaging as describe earlier
Neo-Adjuvant & Adjuvant Systemic Therapy (Chemotherapy, Hormone Therapy and Biological agents): 
Individualized as per the disease stage, menopausal status, receptor status, other prognostic or predictive 
factors along with the tolerance, compliance, feasibility and cost-benefit aspects of a particular approach. 
Indication, regimes and sequencing are described later in this document.
Adjuvant Radiotherapy: Post Operative radiotherapy (usually after completion of chemotherapy) is indicated 
in all patients undergoing BCT and after mastectomy if T3 or +ve resection margins or >3nodes. For 
21 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
1-3 +ve nodes, it is being increasingly considered as discussed later. Accelerated Partial Breast Irradiation 
(APBI) with various techniques is an option for highly select cases in experienced centres. RT indications 
and dose regimes are described later.
*Eligibility for BCT: The breast conservation approach would be considered successful if it produces 
satisfactory cosmetic outcome and the probability of tumor control or late sequelae are not inferior to 
mastectomy. This requires careful evaluation and selection of cases; good quality breast imaging; wide 
excision of primary with appropriate axillary surgery by experienced surgeons; meticulous histopathological 
evaluation and reporting of resected specimen; quality assured technique of radiotherapy delivery to 
standard doses and regular clinical and mammographic follow up to detect and salvage breast recurrences 
early. This would require infrastructure, equipment (e.g. LINAC which is required 
in >75% BCT cases) and 
expertise. Centres with requisite facilities and expertise (sometimes shared between the referring and the 
referral centre) should offer BCT to eligible women or if they lack such facilities refer the eligible women 
who wish to conserve their Breasts to such centres.
Absolute contra-Indication: Diffuse micro-calcification; multicentric tumor involving >1 quadrant; resection 
margins +ve on repeated excisions and EIC+; serious concerns over patient’s likely compliance with RT 
and follow up; rare syndromes of radiation hypersensitivity; previous chest/ breast RT.
Relative contra-indication: If lump to breast size ratio precludes acceptable cosmesis even after NACT, 
BCT with acceptable cosmetic outcome can be obtained with reconstruction or oncoplasty in expert 
centres.
5.3 Management Schema in Large Operable or Locally Advanced Breast Cancer
Clinical Diagnosis of Large operable (T3, N0-1) or Locally Advanced (T3-4 any N; N2-3 any T) Breast Cancer
Hispathological confirmation and Breast Imaging as described earlier
Metastatic-work-up as described earlier
Mastectomy with Primary skin closure
Feasible
No Response
Assess response after 4 cycles of chemotherapy
MRM (standard)/BCT (optional)1,2
In responding patients, Complete all
NACT cycles before Surgery OR
Perform Surgery after 3-4 cycles &
than give remaining chemotherapy
Mastectomy OR
2nd line chemo
(Based on operability)
Not Feasible
Patient keen
for BCTMRM
followed
by
adjuvant
therapy
Neo-Adjuvant
Chemotherapy (NACT)
Completion of Chemotherapy and Adjuvant
Hormone therapy and Radiotherapy
No metastatic disease Metastatic Disease
Follow relevant algorithm
for Metalistic Breast Cancer
22 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
Systemic Therapy: Chemotherapy, Hormone Therapy or Biological agents are individualized as per the 
disease stage, menopausal status, ER/ PR/Her2, other prognostic or predictive factors along with the 
tolerance, compliance, feasibility and cost-benefit aspects of a particular approach as described later. 
Adjuvant Radiotherapy: Post Operative radiotherapy, usually after completion of chemotherapy to all 
LOBC /LABC patients irrespective of the type of surgery. Radiotherapy regimes described later.
Ref: 1. Parmar V et al(2006 ) Int J Surg 4:106–114. 2. Mamounas EP et al.ASCO Breast Symp 2010. Abstract 90
5.4 Management Schema for patients presenting after lumpectomy / excision elsewhere with or without 
sufficient clinico-pathological information (a common presentation)
Detailed history for the site and size of primary and features suggestive of skin involvement. •
Clinical examination for breast scar, indurations, residual lump, skin, nodal and distant sites. •
Review pre biopsy breast imaging films & reports if available and repeat if feasible •
Review pathology report and blocks, if available, for tumor size, margins, type, grade, ER/PR •
Metastatic-work-up if features of LOBC/ LABC cannot be ruled out. •
Review T size, margins & other Clinical / Imaging features for likely pre-op status (OBC/LOBC/LABC)
Wishes for & eligible for BCT Not wanting OR not eligible for BCT Want BCT but presently NOT suitable
Wide excision
has been done.
Margins free
Inadequate
excision. Margins
+ve or unknown
MRM
followed by
adjuvant therapy
(e.g. Multicentric tumour or
diffuse micro-calcification)
(margin +ve or unknown & post Biopsy
induration precludes cosmetically
acceptable re-excision)
Only
Axillary
dissection
If feasible,
Revision excision +
Axillary dissection
Revision excision with
acceptable cosmesis not
feasible due to post
biopsy Tumour Bed
induration/skin changes
Adjuvant therapy (Chemo / Hormone /
RT) as per pathological stage & features
Neo-Adjuvant Chemotherapy
After 3-6 cycles when induration / skin changes
resolve, consider Revision Excision + Ax. Dissection
in cases suitable for BCT or MRM
Systemic Therapy: Use of chemotherapy, hormone therapy and biological agents is individualized as per 
the disease stage, menopausal status, receptor status, other prognostic/ predictive factors & the tolerance 
/compliance/feasibility/cost-benefit aspects of a particular approach. Indication, regimes and sequencing 
described later in this document.
Adjuvant Radiotherapy: Post Operative radiotherapy, usually after completion of chemotherapy to all 
women undergoing BCT and all women undergoing mastectomy if LOBC /LABC cannot be reliably 
ruled out. Radiotherapy fields and dose regimes are described later.
23 Consensus Document for Management of Breast Cancer
T
he indications for BCT or mastectomy and its sequencing with chemotherapy are described in 
the previous chapter on management algorithms. Indications for special surgical procedures are 
described here. 
Sentinel node biopsy and Axillary sampling: Several RCTs 28,29 show that in women with small tumors and 
clinically negative axilla, the morbidity from axillary dissection done as a therapeutic or staging modality 
can be avoided by careful histological examination of the sentinel lymph nodes identified by various 
methods and conducting full axillary dissection only in those with positive sentinel nodes. Sentinel Node 
Biopsy (SNB) is performed using 0.3ml sub-dermal injection of patent blue dye or 2% methylene blue 10 
minutes prior to the surgical incision and 0.5ml of technetium–labeled sulphur colloid 2 hours prior to 
surgery. The technique should be validated in each centre for its sensitivity and specificity before offering 
it as a routine. Low axillary sampling, an alternative to SNB can be practiced more widely in developing 
countries. If histological evaluation of sentinel lymph nodes or low axillary sampling does not reveal any 
metastasis, completion axillary clearance is not warranted. However, if the SNB is positive or the paraffin 
sections show metastasis, completion axillary clearances (Level I – III) are generally considered. There is 
however recent EORTC-AMAROS RCT showing that in SNB + ve cases, axillary RT achieves axillary 
control rates similar to completion axillary clearance but with different morbidity pattern (Donker et al, 
Lancet Oncol. 2014).
Breast reconstruction: In centres with such expertise, breast reconstruction should be offered to women 
who are likely to have a poor cosmetic outcome after BCT or are undergoing mastectomy and not at 
excessive risk of local recurrence or wound complication. Because of the resource constraints and optional 
nature of this service, few centres in the country, especially in the busy public hospitals, routinely offer 
or perform breast reconstructions for majority of the patients who may benefit from such reconstruction. 
Hence good quality breast reconstruction services may be prioritized. 
Whole breast reconstruction (WBR) with or without nipple areolar reconstruction should be offered to 
motivated young women who have to undergo a mastectomy 
for a DCIS or early breast cancer (for reasons 
such as diffuse micro-calcification or multi-centric disease) or as a prophylactic surgery as in BRCA1 
mutation carriers. Reconstruction could be immediate or delayed. WBR can be done with 
pedicle flap  
(Latissimus dorsi flap with implant or expander or a Transverse Rectus Abdominis Myocutaneous flap) 
or as a 
Free flap with microvascular anastomosis (Deep Inferior Epigastric perforator flap; Anterolateral 
thigh flap or Superior Gluteal artery perforator flap)
Partial breast reconstruction (PBR): Is indicated after upfront surgery for large tumor with micro-calcification 
or after NACT with unfavourable breast to tumor ratio and patient is keen on breast conservation. 
Reconstruction can be done using autogenous tissue (fat, muscle, skin and vasculature) from the back 
(latissimus dorsi flap), abdomen or thigh as a free or pedicled flap.
CHAPTER
6 SURGERY FOR BREAST CANCER